---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# groundwaterconductivity

*Calculate the electric conductivity of water from the ionic
composition*

## Useful for water monitoring programs

The R script calculates the electric conductivity of water at 25°C from
the ionic composition of the water. The comparison of the calculated and
the measured electric conductivity is useful for quality control of
groundwater and surface water monitoring programs. The user must make an
input file with the proper names and dimensions of the measured cations
and anions. The script reads the input file and produces an output file
with the calculated conductivity using the formulas described by a Dutch
report by Stuyfzand, P. (1987). Een zeer nauwkeurige berekening van het
elektrisch geleidingsvermogen, ter controle en aanvulling van
wateranalyses: 2e versie. Rijswijk, KIWA. This report selects an optimal
calculation method for each individual set of measured ions. It allows
an accurate calculation of the conductivity for a wide range of
different groundwater types. The method was compared with a well-known
publication of McCleskey, R. B., et al. (2012). "A new method of
calculating electrical conductivity with applications to natural
waters." Geochimica et cosmochimica acta 77: 369-382. The Dutch report
gave accurate results over a much wider range of different groundwater
types.

## Requirements

You will need a data frame with the concentrations of a number of ions.
See for example data/StuijzandTable31.csv The calculations can use
calcium, chloride, iron, potassium, magnesium, manganese, sodium,
ammonium, nitrate, phosphate, zinc, bicarbonate, carbonate in
milligrams/liter. Aluminum is used in microgram/liter and the pH is used
as such. When data are missing they are assumed to be zero except for
the pH which is assumed to be seven. Bicarbonate is in equilibrium with
carbon dioxide which can escape from the water sample. Therefore
bicarbonate is not easy to measure and sometimes it is actually not
measured. In that case the script can estimate bicarbonate from the ion
balance of the cations and anions. When there is an excess of cations
one can assume that bicarbonate was present in the original sample to
complete the ion balance having equal amounts of cations and anions. The
script can accept a number of input styles. When bicarbonate is never
measured it will be estimated. In some monitoring programs phosphate is
not measured while total phosphorus is used instead. This can be
appropriate when most of the total phosphorus is present as phosphate.
When phosphate is never measured in a monitoring program it will be
estimated from total phosphorus.

## Input styles

As for now the following input styles are supported: KRWQCinput,
Stuyfzand, broadLMM, broadLGW. To check whether your input file matches
the expectations of the selected input style an intermediate standard
input file is produced named
StuyfzandTable31_Stuyfzandstyle_LMM_broad_input_dataframe.rds for the
input file StuyfzandTable31.csv and the Stuyfzandstyle input style. Note
that the elements are preceded with an x and are expressed in
milligrams/liter except for xal which is expressed in microgram/liter,
xpo4 which is expressed in milligrams P/liter. xhv is the pH and xecv is
the measured electric conductivity at 25°C expressed in mSiemens/meter.
This was manually calculated from the k20 measured correcting for the
5°C temperature difference.

## Output
If you have installed the package library(groundwaterconductivity) will load the functions. If you run:

myoutputdataframe<-calculate_conductivity(inputfilename="data/Table.csv",inputstyle = "Stuyfzand",outputstyle = "minimal", celcius = 25)

The calculations will be performed. You can replace data/Table.csv with your own data. 

The file StuyfzandTable31_Stuyfzand_LMM_broad_output_dataframe.rds
generates the complete output of the calculations. Most users appreciate
a more tailored output generated by the proper output style. For example
StuyfzandTable31_Stuyfzandstyle.csv. This small file is easily readable
with Microsoft Excel. The Stuyfzand output style has a number of column
names:

-   "myrownames" your original row numbers from the input file can also
    be expressed as text

-   "method" a reference to the calculation method used for this
    specific sample

-   "ionbalance" the sum of the positive ions minus the sum of the
    negative ions divided by the sum of all ions

-   "k20_calc" the conductivity originally calculated by Stuyfzand at
    20°C in micro Siemens/centimeter

-   "rk20_calc" the conductivity at 20°C calculated by this R script in
    micro Siemens/centimeter

-   "ec25_calc" the conductivity at 25°C calculated by this R script in
    milli Siemens/meter

-   "xecv_measured" the measured conductivity by Stuyfzand converted to
    25°C in milli Siemens/meter

-   "percentage_xecv_ec25" the difference between the measured and
    calculated conductivity in percent of the calculated conductivity at
    25°C. It ranges from -7.74 till 1.35% in the Stuyfzand data.

-   "ec25_xecv_sr" the normalized difference of the logarithmically
    transformed measured and calculated conductivity. 95% of the
    measurements range between -2 and +2.

-   "skat_san_sr" the normalized difference between the logarithmically
    transformed sum of the cations and anions.

-   "kations meq/l" the sum of the cations H+, Na+, K+, Ca2+,Mg2+, NH4+,
    Fe2+, Mn2+

-   "anions meq/l" the sum of the anions Cl-, HCO3-, SO4-, NO3-, CO32-
    in charge milli-equivalents/liter "max_anion meq/l", the major
    negative ion in charge milli-equivalents/liter

-   "max_anion_name" "max_kation meq/l" the major positive ion in charge
    milli-equivalents/liter

-   "max_kation_name"

-   "suspect" When the calculated conductivity largely exceeds the
    measured one ("ec25_xecv_sr">2) it is possible that either the
    highest cation or the highest anion is actually much lower than the
    reported value. When there is a large excess of cations
    ("skat_san_sr">2) then the highest cation is suspect. When there is
    a large excess of anions ("skat_san_sr"\<(-2) ) the highest anion is
    suspect.

-   The last column shows Interpretation

# Interpretation

When the calculated conductivity deviates strongly from the measured
conductivity something might be wrong. It can be the measured
conductivity or some of the contributing cations or anions. When also
the ion balance is off it becomes more probable that there is a mistake
in the measurement of cations or anions. In addition one can look at
previous measurements at the same location which can also give a clue on
which parameter is causing the discrepancy between the calculated and
the measured conductivity.
